Paper: Jupyter Book 2 and the MyST Document Stack (#1096)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/jupyter_book/main.md

Reviewer: In rendered preview mode, copyright is shown as, "c jupyter, et. al."  Replace with "c Project Jupyter"  
(et. al. applies to humans. This edit assigns the copyright to the first entity, Project Jupyter)

---
title: Jupyter Book 2 and the MyST Document Stack

> subtitle: A composable, extensible, machine-readable, next-generation stack for authoring and sharing computational content

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
subtitle: A composable, extensible, machine-readable stack for authoring and sharing computational content
```

I might remove "next-generation" from this sub-title. I think most of the information the paper wants to convey is in the first 3 adjectives, and "next-generation" here is just serving a marketing purpose.

In other words, the first 3 adjectives help answer the question "why would I use Jupyter Book 2"? For me personally, its being described as "next-generation" would not be a compelling answer to that question.

If you disagree, thanks for reading and please feel free to resolve this thread without changes.

Author: Thanks - we are updating this to:

`A modular, extensible, web-native stack for authoring and publishing computational narratives`

Agree that the next-generation is not necessary!

abstract: |

>   Jupyter Book allows researchers and educators to create books and knowledge bases that are reusable, reproducible, and interactive. Over the past three years, Jupyter Book has been entirely rebuilt atop the MyST Document Engine (mystmd). The `mystmd` engine prioritizes machine readability, extensible and flexible deployment, modular and composable architecture, and treats computation as a first-class citizen in authoring and reading. This new foundation introduces a scalable way to publish interactive computational content, support structured metadata, and enable content reuse across contexts. Jupyter Book 2 (JB2) is now a Jupyter subproject, powering open scientific resources including [The Turing Way](https://book.the-turing-way.org/), [QuantEcon](https://quantecon.org/), [Project Pythia](https://projectpythia.org/), and the [QIIME 2](https://qiime2.org/) Framework (Q2F) documentation ecosystem. This paper introduces the principles, architecture, and capabilities of JB2, shares real-world adoption stories, and explores how these tools are shaping the future of open computational publishing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Jupyter Book allows researchers and educators to create books and knowledge bases that are reusable, reproducible, and interactive. Over the past three years, Jupyter Book has been entirely rebuilt atop the MyST Document Engine (mystmd). The `mystmd` engine prioritizes machine readability, extensible and flexible deployment, and modular and composable architecture. It provides excellent support for computation in both authoring and reading. This new foundation introduces a scalable way to publish interactive computational content, support structured metadata, and enable content reuse across contexts. Jupyter Book 2 (JB2) is now a Jupyter subproject, powering open scientific resources including [The Turing Way](https://book.the-turing-way.org/), [QuantEcon](https://quantecon.org/), [Project Pythia](https://projectpythia.org/), and the [QIIME 2](https://qiime2.org/) Framework (Q2F) documentation ecosystem. This paper introduces the principles, architecture, and capabilities of JB2, shares real-world adoption stories, and explores how these tools are shaping the future of open computational publishing.
```

The phrase about "computation" breaks the parallel structure of the sentence (where all the preceding phrases complete "prioritizes `{phrase}`".

Would you consider this re-write?

Here, I'm also proposing removing the phrase "treats as a first-class citizen", in favor of more direct language .. I think English idioms like that can make it a bit more difficult for readers who don't speak English as a first language to understand the paper.

Author: We have removed "first-class citizen" throughout. We have also reworked the abstract:

```
This new foundation introduces a scalable way to publish modern scientific content that enables interactive code and computation, structured metadata, and content reuse across contexts.
  It allows for a more fluid workflow between computational discovery and communication, treating computation as _first-class_ in both authoring and reading.
```

>   Jupyter Book allows researchers and educators to create books and knowledge bases that are reusable, reproducible, and interactive. Over the past three years, Jupyter Book has been entirely rebuilt atop the MyST Document Engine (mystmd). The `mystmd` engine prioritizes machine readability, extensible and flexible deployment, modular and composable architecture, and treats computation as a first-class citizen in authoring and reading. This new foundation introduces a scalable way to publish interactive computational content, support structured metadata, and enable content reuse across contexts. Jupyter Book 2 (JB2) is now a Jupyter subproject, powering open scientific resources including [The Turing Way](https://book.the-turing-way.org/), [QuantEcon](https://quantecon.org/), [Project Pythia](https://projectpythia.org/), and the [QIIME 2](https://qiime2.org/) Framework (Q2F) documentation ecosystem. This paper introduces the principles, architecture, and capabilities of JB2, shares real-world adoption stories, and explores how these tools are shaping the future of open computational publishing.

Reviewer: Add footnote for a formal citation of linked URLs.

line 5: "... powering open scientific resources including [The Turing Way](https://book.the-turing-way.org/), [QuantEcon](https://quantecon.org/), [Project Pythia](https://projectpythia.org/), and the [QIIME 2](https://qiime2.org/) Framework (Q2F) documentation ecosystem."[fn]

footnote: See https://book.the-turing-way.org/, https://quantecon.org/, https://projectpythia.org/, and https://qiime2.org/

Reasoning: It is preferred in a journal article to cite URLs in a footnote, while Curvenote expects embedded URLs. I recommend doing it both ways. Also printed PDFs will not show embedded URLs, so having it both ways will help.

Author: We have added the links, but haven't added the footnotes yet unless there is additional information in the footnote (we did add this with JATS, GFM and CommonMark based on your suggestions!).

I don't feel super strongly about this. All output formats (PDFs, HTML and JATS) support inline links. And after some small discussions last year we came to the opposite conclusion after going through the proceedings, #1037 (there wasn't consistency across authors at all). Opting for web-standard formatting (people know what links are!) rather than changing content for printed-out-on-paper requirements to show all information. Maybe we can take this discussion out into a different thread, would be curious to make a decision on it for the proceedings in general... !

Reviewer: Hello Rowan, I don’t have a strong view on adding the footnote in addition to the links. If this was published in a printed journal, then a footnote will be required. But I see SciPy Proceedings as slightly looser than peer reviewed journals. My suggestions were optional and this one even more so. :-)

>   Jupyter Book allows researchers and educators to create books and knowledge bases that are reusable, reproducible, and interactive. Over the past three years, Jupyter Book has been entirely rebuilt atop the MyST Document Engine (mystmd). The `mystmd` engine prioritizes machine readability, extensible and flexible deployment, modular and composable architecture, and treats computation as a first-class citizen in authoring and reading. This new foundation introduces a scalable way to publish interactive computational content, support structured metadata, and enable content reuse across contexts. Jupyter Book 2 (JB2) is now a Jupyter subproject, powering open scientific resources including [The Turing Way](https://book.the-turing-way.org/), [QuantEcon](https://quantecon.org/), [Project Pythia](https://projectpythia.org/), and the [QIIME 2](https://qiime2.org/) Framework (Q2F) documentation ecosystem. This paper introduces the principles, architecture, and capabilities of JB2, shares real-world adoption stories, and explores how these tools are shaping the future of open computational publishing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Jupyter Book allows researchers and educators to create books and knowledge bases that are reusable, reproducible, and interactive. Over the past three years, Jupyter Book has been entirely rebuilt atop the MyST **_(Markedly Structured Text)_** Document Engine (myst engine). The myst engine prioritizes machine readability, extensible and flexible deployment, modular and composable architecture, and treats computation as a first-class citizen in authoring and reading. **_Along with the Myst Markdown Specification (mystmd specification), the_** myst engine introduces a scalable way to publish interactive computational content, support structured metadata, and enable content reuse across contexts. Jupyter Book 2 (JB2) is now a Jupyter subproject, powering open scientific resources including [The Turing Way](https://book.the-turing-way.org/), [QuantEcon](https://quantecon.org/), [Project Pythia](https://projectpythia.org/), and the [QIIME 2](https://qiime2.org/) Framework (Q2F) documentation ecosystem. This paper introduces the principles, architecture, and capabilities of JB2, shares real-world adoption stories, and explores how these tools are shaping the future of open computational publishing.
```
I've added mystmd language specification. I think it's needed to make concepts clear.

Author: We have reworked the abstract to hopefully make it clearer!

---

## Introduction

> Jupyter Book has become a cornerstone tool in computational science education and open publishing, powering over 14,000 publicly available books, lectures, tutorials, and knowledge repositories. It bridges the gap between exploratory computation and readable narrative, making it possible to document, share, and publish computational workflows in accessible formats.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Jupyter Book has become an important tool in computational science education and open publishing, powering over 14,000 publicly available books, lectures, tutorials, and knowledge repositories. It enables clear communication of both exploratory computation and readable narrative, making it possible to document, share, and publish computational workflows in accessible formats.
```

Proposing removing more idioms with direct language:

* "cornerstone" --> "important"
* "bridges the gap" --> "enables clear communication of"

Author: Changing to:

```
Jupyter Book (@jupyter-book) has become a widely used tool in computational science and open publishing, powering over 18,000 publicly available books, lectures, tutorials, and knowledge repositories. It enables clear communication of both exploratory computation and narrative text, making it possible to document, share, and publish computational workflows in accessible formats.
```

We will also have a citation/reference in here about the 18,000.

We have removed "cornerstone" and taken your wording in the second suggestion.

> Jupyter Book has become a cornerstone tool in computational science education and open publishing, powering over 14,000 publicly available books, lectures, tutorials, and knowledge repositories. It bridges the gap between exploratory computation and readable narrative, making it possible to document, share, and publish computational workflows in accessible formats.

Reviewer: [Need citation for this number. Suggest a footnote number added to end of sentence.]

> Jupyter Book has become a cornerstone tool in computational science education and open publishing, powering over 14,000 publicly available books, lectures, tutorials, and knowledge repositories. It bridges the gap between exploratory computation and readable narrative, making it possible to document, share, and publish computational workflows in accessible formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jupyter Book has become a cornerstone tool in computational science education and open publishing, powering over **_14,000_** [need citation] publicly available books, lectures, tutorials, and knowledge repositories.[fn] It bridges the gap between exploratory computation and readable narrative, making it possible to document, share, and publish computational workflows in accessible formats.
```
The specific number "14,000" needs citation. Please add a footnote number to this sentence, and add source citation in footnote.

Author: We have added a footnote for this!

> With Jupyter Book 2, the project has undergone a major transformation. The entire system has been rewritten around the MyST Document Engine (mystmd), a next-generation engine for authoring computational narratives. The project has also formalized the MyST Document Standard as a structured and semantically-meaningful way of representing computational content in a reusable way, with MyST Markdown as a primary authoring syntax. The goal of this overhaul is to make structured scientific content more interoperable, composable, extensible, and machine-readable. This enables researchers to publish high-quality, interactive content with support for standards-based reuse, full-text APIs, executable notebooks, and output formats like Typst, LaTeX, Microsoft Word, JATS XML, and more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With Jupyter Book 2, the project has undergone a major transformation. The entire system has been rewritten around the MyST Document Engine (mystmd), an engine for authoring computational narratives whose popularity has grown rapidly in recent years. The project has also formalized the MyST Document Standard as a structured and semantically-meaningful way of representing computational content in a reusable way, with MyST Markdown as a primary authoring syntax. The goal of this overhaul is to make structured scientific content more interoperable, composable, extensible, and machine-readable. This enables researchers to publish high-quality, interactive content with support for standards-based reuse, full-text APIs, executable notebooks, and output formats like Typst, LaTeX, Microsoft Word, JATS XML, and more.
```

Another recommendation to remove "next-generation" in favor of language that more directly speaks to the benefit(s) you want to communicate.

Author: We have removed next-generation everywhere!

> With Jupyter Book 2, the project has undergone a major transformation. The entire system has been rewritten around the MyST Document Engine (mystmd), a next-generation engine for authoring computational narratives. The project has also formalized the MyST Document Standard as a structured and semantically-meaningful way of representing computational content in a reusable way, with MyST Markdown as a primary authoring syntax. The goal of this overhaul is to make structured scientific content more interoperable, composable, extensible, and machine-readable. This enables researchers to publish high-quality, interactive content with support for standards-based reuse, full-text APIs, executable notebooks, and output formats like Typst, LaTeX, Microsoft Word, JATS XML, and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Jupyter Book 2 (JB2), the project has undergone a major transformation. The entire system has been rewritten around the MyST (Markedly Structured Text) Document Engine (myst engine), a next-generation engine for authoring computational narratives. The project was also built on the MyST Markdown Document Standard (mystmd standard) as a structured and semantically-meaningful way of representing computational content in a reusable way, with MyST Markdown as a primary authoring syntax.[fn1] The goal of this overhaul is to make structured scientific content more interoperable, composable, extensible, and machine-readable. This enables researchers to publish high-quality, interactive content with support for standards-based reuse, full-text APIs, executable notebooks, and output formats like Typst [fn2], LaTeX [fn3], Microsoft Word, JATS (Journal Article Tag Suite) XML[fn4], and more.
```
First use of JB2 in body text, defined here.  After this point mostly use JB2.  
First use of MyST acronym defined. 
First use of JATS acronym defined. 

footnote 1: First use of MyST Document Engine and acronym "mystmd".  
Please reword fn1 and add to the paper.  

**mystmd** is used to represent multiple concepts throughtout the paper and can be confusing. 
- MyST Document Engine is the software that converts source content into AST format for outputs to various platforms.  Use **MyST engine** or **myst engine** for clarity.   
- MyST Markdown or MyST specification is the language defintions standard. Use **MyST standard** or **mystmd standard** for clarity.  
- MyST Markdown is a colloqual reference to the mystmd language. I don't think this is used, but if needed,  **mystmd** can be used for this. 
- Also when refering to the whole tool-chain for MyST extensions and custom templates, **myst ecosystem** or **MyST ecosystem** can be used.  
- Markdown is a lightweight markup language. CommonMark is an unambiguous specification for the Markdown languag with a formatting test suite. It was created to improve consistent rendering across multiple platforms. MyST Markdown specification is an extension of the CommonMark version of Markdown.  

footnote 2: A simpler LaTeX alternative, see https://typst.app/ 
footnote 3: A standard for scientific and mathematical publishing, see https://www.latex-project.org/  
footnote 4: See https://jats.nlm.nih.gov/.

Author: We have added abbreviations when things are first defined as well as links to the tools.

We have also improved our use terminology and clarified the definitions. We have used those definitions throughout, rather than saying `mystmd`, which is a repository/tool with multiple things in it.

Hopefully much clearer now! Thank you for calling this out.

> With Jupyter Book 2, the project has undergone a major transformation. The entire system has been rewritten around the MyST Document Engine (mystmd), a next-generation engine for authoring computational narratives. The project has also formalized the MyST Document Standard as a structured and semantically-meaningful way of representing computational content in a reusable way, with MyST Markdown as a primary authoring syntax. The goal of this overhaul is to make structured scientific content more interoperable, composable, extensible, and machine-readable. This enables researchers to publish high-quality, interactive content with support for standards-based reuse, full-text APIs, executable notebooks, and output formats like Typst, LaTeX, Microsoft Word, JATS XML, and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With JB2, the project has undergone a major transformation. The entire system has been rewritten around the MyST Document Engine (mystmd), a next-generation engine for authoring computational narratives. The project has also formalized the MyST Document Standard as a structured and semantically-meaningful way of representing computational content in a reusable way, with MyST Markdown as a primary authoring syntax. The goal of this overhaul is to make structured scientific content more interoperable, composable, extensible, and machine-readable. This enables researchers to publish high-quality, interactive content with support for standards-based reuse, full-text APIs, executable notebooks, and output formats like Typst, LaTeX, Microsoft Word, JATS XML, and more.
```

Author: @KirstieJane went through and made a lot of "Jupyter Book 2"s into JB2s but I didn't do that for all of them - it just became too much of a cognitive load to remember all the acronyms for some sections. We have tried to use JB2 when it made sense to have the abbreviation but then spell out Jupyter Book 2 when i felt the sentence was more accessible when we weren't asking the reader to remember the acronym (even though it is available on hover..!).

### Bridging Exploration and Publication

The mission of Jupyter Book and MyST is to build composable tools and standards for people that communicate technical and computational narratives. This communication spans the full lifecycle of discovery—from informal lab notes and collaborative tutorials to formal research articles and textbooks. Our goal is to support authors, educators, and researchers as they share work within local communities and publish across the global scientific commons.

We are focused on two overlapping but distinct communities:

Data-driven communicators
: Researchers, analysts, and educators who need to share working, reproducible content with collaborators, students, or the public. These users rely on Jupyter, Python, and other computational tools in their daily workflows, but often lack well-integrated systems to communicate what they’ve done or how to reproduce it.

Scholarly Authors and Publishers
: Scientists and academics preparing content for peer review, journals, repositories, or formal documentation. These users need structured metadata, citation systems, and outputs compatible with academic and institutional publishing pipelines.

> Both of these groups are underserved by the current ecosystem. Today’s scientific workflows rely on computational tools like Jupyter Notebooks, yet the systems used to communicate and publish these workflows are fragmented and poorly integrated. Interactive computing environments are designed for exploration; publishing tools are optimized for presentation. Content is regularly duplicated, reformatted, and stripped of context in order to meet the constraints of output-specific pipelines (e.g. the PDF!).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both of these groups are underserved by the current ecosystem. Today’s scientific workflows rely on computational tools like Jupyter Notebooks, yet the systems used to communicate and publish these workflows are fragmented and poorly integrated. Interactive computing environments are designed for exploration; publishing tools are optimized for presentation. Content is regularly duplicated, reformatted, and stripped of context in order to meet the constraints of output-specific pipelines (e.g., for PDF generation).
```
correct tone, remove "!", add "," after e.g.

Author: Changed to "output-specific pipelines, such as PDF generation."

Jupyter Book and MyST address this gap by adopting several guiding principles:

Structured Documents and Machine Readability

> : Produce a machine-readable abstract syntax tree (AST) for every page. This serves as the canonical representation of the content, allowing it to be rendered into multiple outputs—without losing structure, metadata, or intent. We give specific effort to support the open-science ecosystem, especially around structured, scholarly metadata that help discoverability (e.g. DOIs, ORCIDs, RORs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Produce a machine-readable abstract syntax tree (AST) for every page. This serves as the canonical representation of the content, allowing it to be rendered into multiple outputs—without losing structure, metadata, or intent. We give specific effort to support the open-science ecosystem, especially around structured, scholarly metadata that help discoverability (e.g., DOIs (Digital Object Identifiers), ORCIDs (Open Researcher and Contributor IDs), and RORs (Research Organization Registry Identifiers).
```
Defined acronyms. Please make sure my guesses are correct. 
Added "," after e.g.

Author: These have been defined in text, and are also available on hover / screen-reader. Added `,` after all e.g.'s in the text.

## Design Principles

The design of Jupyter Book 2 is grounded in practical responses to the needs of researchers, educators, and publishers who must communicate with and about data. The guiding principles introduced earlier—structured documents, composability, computation as a first-class element, and community-led development—translate directly into architectural and interface-level decisions in JB2 and the mystmd engine.

In this section, we describe how these principles are operationalized in Jupyter Book 2, outlining the technical and conceptual strategies that distinguish it from previous versions and from other publishing tools.

### Structured and Machine Readable Content

Underpinning every Jupyter Book 2 site is a structured, machine-readable abstract syntax tree (AST). This internal representation captures not just the text of a document, but also its semantic components: citations, headings, roles, directives, code blocks, figures, equations, and embedded metadata like ORCIDs, DOIs, or author affiliations.

> Pages can expose machine-readable metadata endpoints (page.json), enabling full-text search, granular cross-referencing, and live content embedding across projects. By aligning with community standards (e.g., JATS, DOIs, ORCID, ROR), the system supports today’s scholarly publishing workflows, remains grounded in lightweight, markdown-based authoring, and opens up new possibilities for more composable workflows in the future for scientific authoring.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pages can expose machine-readable metadata endpoints (`page.json`), enabling full-text search, granular cross-referencing, and live content embedding across projects. By aligning with community standards (e.g., JATS, DOIs, ORCID, ROR), the system supports today’s scholarly publishing workflows, remains grounded in lightweight, markdown-based authoring, and opens up new possibilities for more composable workflows in the future for scientific authoring.
```

I think `page.json` should be inline-code-formatted, to clarify that it is a file name that has special meaning to this software.

Author: We have improved this in all locations and ensured it is in inline-code.

> ![](https://lh7-rt.googleusercontent.com/docsz/AD_4nXdK1XxQZhyEImdqfWjMh8sAY2av-1A5SFm-uqbXCsfDeW53EVq4P6cQ7oMeWIGqJ8uYqTJK-RPra18BdJvJls0JX50jhIENjU4LJe5fn3n7ix_maR8vkl8f8FU6lt4bXZ10-zb8SQ?key=lS7P7yOBhfjw9T7nfZGN0w)

Reviewer: Add Figure Title and Caption

[Title example] **Figure 1. The MyST Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) as a canonical representation.** 
[Image File goes here]
[Caption example, shown below the image] 
This diagram illustrates how source content, including Markdown files and Jupyter Notebooks, is parsed into a unified, machine-readable AST. This intermediate representation preserves semantic structure and metadata, allowing for rendering into multiple output formats like HTML, PDF, WORD and JATS XML from a single source.  

If JATS is not defined before this, use instead [JATS (Journal Article Tag Suite) XML].  
I've define JATS before the image, in my comments (line 12)

Also: the image file is blurry and text within the image cannot be read. This goes against a proceedings paper guidline. (See "Figure text should be of a readable size." from https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/blob/2025/review_criteria.md)  
If possible, please replace with a high resolution image. If the original high resolution image is lost, you may be able to upsample (sharpen) the image using AI.  

Curvenotes build preview will shows related files in a right-hand column. 
Please list this image file and "history.md" file as related matter for Curvenotes.

Author: We have (a) added a caption; (b) improved the resolution of this figure; and (c) defined JATS.

### Modular and Composable Design

The MyST ecosystem is designed for composition. Documents are structured into small, addressable components—sections, figures, equations, terms, figures, outputs—that can be reused across books, projects, and publications. This modularity supports new patterns of collaboration and publication: a figure generated in a course textbook can be cited and embedded in a different tutorial or a journal article without duplication or loss of provenance.

> Each page or resource in a Jupyter Book project is assigned a unique slug and corresponding AST. These can be referenced across builds or even embedded with hover previews. Updates to shared content propagate automatically to referencing projects, enabling collaborative knowledge bases and modular curricula. This is based on both the MyST Specification ([mystmd.org/spec](http://mystmd.org/spec)) and a cross-reference manifest myst.xref.json. Similar to intersphinx references the myst.xref.json gives stable links to any aspect of the content, however, the structured JSON APIs enable hover-previews across projects. This feature allows for projects to add a reference to the project, and then use xref: links to deeply link or embed the content; these links are either done at build-time or render time and allow for dynamic linking between projects with a simple user interface.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each page or resource in a Jupyter Book project is assigned a unique slug and corresponding AST. These can be referenced across builds or even embedded with hover previews. Updates to shared content propagate automatically to referencing projects, enabling collaborative knowledge bases and modular curricula. This is based on both the MyST Specification ([mystmd.org/spec](http://mystmd.org/spec)) and a cross-reference manifest `myst.xref.json`. Similar to intersphinx references the `myst.xref.json` gives stable links to any aspect of the content, however, the structured JSON APIs enable hover-previews across projects. This feature allows for projects to add a reference to the project, and then use `xref:` links to deeply link or embed the content; these links are either done at build-time or render time and allow for dynamic linking between projects with a simple user interface.
```

These references to special files or text that appears in them would be clearer if they were marked up as code.

Author: These have been fixed!

> Each page or resource in a Jupyter Book project is assigned a unique slug and corresponding AST. These can be referenced across builds or even embedded with hover previews. Updates to shared content propagate automatically to referencing projects, enabling collaborative knowledge bases and modular curricula. This is based on both the MyST Specification ([mystmd.org/spec](http://mystmd.org/spec)) and a cross-reference manifest myst.xref.json. Similar to intersphinx references the myst.xref.json gives stable links to any aspect of the content, however, the structured JSON APIs enable hover-previews across projects. This feature allows for projects to add a reference to the project, and then use xref: links to deeply link or embed the content; these links are either done at build-time or render time and allow for dynamic linking between projects with a simple user interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each page or resource in a Jupyter Book project is assigned a unique slug and corresponding AST. These can be referenced across builds or even embedded with hover previews. Updates to shared content propagate automatically to referencing projects, enabling collaborative knowledge bases and modular curricula. This is based on both the MyST Specification ([mystmd specification](http://mystmd.org/spec))[fn] and a cross-reference manifest myst.xref.json. Similar to intersphinx references, a feature for cross-project linking in the Sphinx documentation generator, the myst.xref.json gives stable links to any aspect of the content, however, the structured JSON APIs enable hover-previews across projects. This feature allows for projects to add a reference to the project, and then use xref: links to deeply link or embed the content; these links are either done at build-time or render time and allow for dynamic linking between projects with a simple user interface.
```
footnote: See http://mystmd.org/spec  

Reasoning: 
Add footnote to cite URL formally.   
Add explanation of intersphinx reference.  
Used a previously defined term: mystmd specification

Author: We have added the sphinx improved language and improved our terminology (removed most mentions to `mystmd`, which has too much in it to be specific).

This composability is designed to make it easier to scaffold different kinds of outputs from the same underlying materials. For example, a long-form research article could be built from shared methods sections, tutorials can be composed of reusable datasets and figures, and institutional knowledge can be aggregated across lab groups.

### First-Class Computation

Many researchers begin their communication journey in a computational notebook—exploring data, testing hypotheses, or sharing early-stage insights. Bringing that work into a readable, shareable, and publishable format traditionally can require significant rework: copying plots into a document, cleaning outputs, manually formatting results. These extra steps not only introduce friction, but also weaken reproducibility and create a disconnect between the computation and its communication.

> Our goal with Jupyter Book 2 is to integrate computational content at every level. Code, figures, outputs, and interactive elements are embedded directly in the narrative and treated as primary content—not sidebars or supplemental material. Executable content can be powered by Binder, JupyterHub, or JupyterLite, allowing readers to rerun computations on demand, right from the page without leaving the context of the narrative. This is powered by [thebe](https://thebe.readthedocs.io/en/stable/), which enables static documents to become interactive by linking code cells with a computational kernel. It is designed to be flexible and forward looking, supporting the full range of kernels available from in-browser execution through to large server based environments that could include specialist hardware such as GPUs and TPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our goal with Jupyter Book 2 is to integrate computational content at every level. Code, figures, outputs, and interactive elements are embedded directly in the narrative and treated as primary content—not sidebars or supplemental material. Executable content can be powered by Binder, JupyterHub, or JupyterLite, allowing readers to rerun computations on demand, right from the page without leaving the context of the narrative. This is powered by [Thebe](https://thebe.readthedocs.io/en/stable/),[fn] which enables static documents to become interactive by linking code cells with a computational kernel. It is designed to be flexible and forward looking, supporting the full range of kernels available from in-browser execution through to large server based environments that could include specialist hardware such as GPUs and TPUs.
```
footnote: See https://thebe.readthedocs.io/en/stable/  

Added footnote to cite URL.  "Thebe" is capitalized (even on project page).

Author: The capitalization has been updated everywhere.

> A major motivation for rebuilding Jupyter Book on top of the new mystmd engine was to enable a truly **web-native execution model**—something that was difficult or impossible within the Sphinx-based architecture. mystmd is built in JavaScript and leverages the unist syntax tree ecosystem, making it directly compatible with modern browser environments and frontend frameworks like React, as well as a host of other plugins and transformations (e.g. unified-latex). This shift has also allowed us to develop jupyterlab-myst, a plugin that brings MyST rendering capabilities directly into JupyterLab.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A major motivation for rebuilding Jupyter Book on top of the new mystmd engine was to enable a truly **web-native execution model**—something that was difficult or impossible within the Sphinx-based architecture. mystmd is built in JavaScript and leverages the unist syntax tree ecosystem, making it directly compatible with modern browser environments and frontend frameworks like React, as well as a host of other plugins and transformations (e.g. unified-latex). This shift has also allowed us to develop `jupyterlab-myst`, a plugin that brings MyST rendering capabilities directly into JupyterLab.
```

If this is the name of a library, would you consider marking it up as code to make it stand out more?

Author: Thank you, fixed everywhere.

> A major motivation for rebuilding Jupyter Book on top of the new mystmd engine was to enable a truly **web-native execution model**—something that was difficult or impossible within the Sphinx-based architecture. mystmd is built in JavaScript and leverages the unist syntax tree ecosystem, making it directly compatible with modern browser environments and frontend frameworks like React, as well as a host of other plugins and transformations (e.g. unified-latex). This shift has also allowed us to develop jupyterlab-myst, a plugin that brings MyST rendering capabilities directly into JupyterLab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A major motivation for building JB2 on top of the myst engine was to enable a truly **web-native execution model**—something that was difficult or impossible within the Sphinx-based architecture. The mystmd specification is built in JavaScript and leverages the unist syntax tree ecosystem, a specification for AST used in content transformation pipelines, making it directly compatible with modern browser environments and frontend frameworks like React, as well as a host of other plugins and transformations (e.g., unified-latex). This shift has also allowed us to develop `jupyterlab-myst`, a plugin that brings MyST rendering capabilities directly to JupyterLab.
```
Changed Jupyter Book to JB2 and changed "rebuilding" to "building". This is the first time JB2 is built. Change mystmd engine to myst engine, as defined at the beginning.  
Changed font for python package name to monospace (back ticks) for "jypterlab-myst"
Added "," after e.g.  
Added explanatory clause to "unist"

Author: This paragraph has been improved, and moved to the appendix. We added in the `unist` description.

@KirstieJane went through and made a lot of "Jupyter Book 2"s into JB2s but I didn't do that for all of them - it just became too much of a cognitive load to remember all the acronyms for some sections. We have tried to use JB2 when it made sense to have the abbreviation but then spell out Jupyter Book 2 when i felt the sentence was more accessible when we weren't asking the reader to remember the acronym (even though it is available on hover..!).

> With jupyterlab-myst, authors can preview how their markdown content will appear in the final rendered book—including directives, equations, citations, and even code outputs—without leaving the notebook environment. This tight feedback loop reduces friction during authoring, while preserving a single source of truth between exploratory notebooks and published outputs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With `jupyterlab-myst`, authors can preview how their markdown content will appear in the final rendered book—including directives, equations, citations, and even code outputs—without leaving the notebook environment. This tight feedback loop reduces friction during authoring, while preserving a single source of truth between exploratory notebooks and published outputs.
```

Author: Fixed!

> With jupyterlab-myst, authors can preview how their markdown content will appear in the final rendered book—including directives, equations, citations, and even code outputs—without leaving the notebook environment. This tight feedback loop reduces friction during authoring, while preserving a single source of truth between exploratory notebooks and published outputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With `jupyterlab-myst`, authors can preview how their markdown content will appear in the final rendered book—including directives, equations, citations, and even code outputs—without leaving the notebook environment. This tight feedback loop reduces friction during authoring, while preserving a single source of truth between exploratory notebooks and published outputs.
```
Package name in back ticks (monospace font)

Author: We have updated this everywhere!

The plugin is a key part of our vision to unify **authoring, execution, and publishing** in one environment. Rather than writing in one tool and rendering in another, as this tool evolves—alongside the real-time collaboration capabilities in JupyterLab—authors will be able to use JupyterLab as a full-featured writing and publishing environment. This lowers the barrier to creating high-quality computational narratives, especially for teams already working inside Jupyter for their day-to-day research and teaching.

### Community-led

> Jupyter Book and MyST are community-led projects, developed in the open and governed collaboratively. \[add team compass links etc.] The tools are maintained by contributors from open infrastructure organizations, universities, independent developers, and end-users who rely on them in practice. This ensures that the ecosystem is not steered by a single stakeholder or locked into one publishing or business model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Jupyter Book and MyST are community-led projects, developed in the open and governed collaboratively. \[add team compass links etc.] The tools are maintained by a contributor community that includes open infrastructure organizations, universities, independent developers, and end-users who rely on them in practice. This ensures that the ecosystem is not steered by a single stakeholder or locked into one publishing or business model.
```

Suggesting minor changes to fix the parallel structure in the list of contributors here. As currently written, it reads like "contributors from independent developers", which is not quite grammatically correct.

Author: Agreed, we have included your language.

> Jupyter Book and MyST are community-led projects, developed in the open and governed collaboratively. \[add team compass links etc.] The tools are maintained by contributors from open infrastructure organizations, universities, independent developers, and end-users who rely on them in practice. This ensures that the ecosystem is not steered by a single stakeholder or locked into one publishing or business model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jupyter Book and MyST are community-led projects, developed in the open and governed collaboratively.[fn][Citation Needed] The tools are maintained by contributors from open infrastructure organizations, universities, independent developers, and end-users who rely on them in practice. This ensures that the ecosystem is not steered by a single stakeholder or locked into one publishing or business model.
```
footnote: Missing citation

Author: We have updated this section:

```
To facilitate participatory and collaborative design as the Jupyter Book 2 ecosystem evolves, all team practices and policies are defined in the [Jupyter Book Team Compass](https://compass.jupyterbook.org/), which inherits its open [governance and practices from Project Jupyter](https://jupyter.org/governance). The [`mystmd` contributing guide](https://mystmd.org/guide/developer) provides detail of the overall stack to help others understand and participate in the development. The [MyST Enhancement Proposal process](https://github.com/jupyter-book/myst-enhancement-proposals/) facilitates community feedback to evolve the MyST Specification and markdown language. These practices aim to allow the MyST ecosystem to remain a community-supported standard while continuing to evolve to meet the needs of its users.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: > `\[add team compass links etc.]`

Just creating a thread to track what looks like a TODO.

Doing this a line below, so the thread isn't closed if my suggestion above is accepted.

Author: We have improved this section and added in the links. Thanks for catching this.

The system is also designed to be extensible and reactive to the community needs. Themes, plugins, and content directives can be customized or replaced entirely, allowing different communities to shape the tooling to fit their own needs. Journals can define their own publishing templates and lab groups can maintain shared standards across projects. There is still much work to be done to fully realize this vision, however, many of the lab-groups, independent publishers, and individuals have taken the tools as is and adapted them to their own workflows and requirements.

## Architecture of Jupyter Book 2

> Jupyter Book 2 uses a structured publishing engine built on top of the [mystmd](https://mystmd.org) document system, moving away from a Sphinx-based static site generator. This new architecture is designed to enable dynamic rendering, multi-format output, and composable content workflows—backed by a structured document model that makes metadata, structure, and computation portable and machine-readable. This section describes the major architectural decisions and components that drive the Jupyter Book 2 stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JB2 uses a structured publishing engine built on top of the mystmd specification,[fn] moving away from a Sphinx-based static site generator. This new architecture is designed to enable dynamic rendering, multi-format output, and composable content workflows—backed by a structured document model that makes metadata, structure, and computation portable and machine-readable. This section describes the major architectural decisions and components that drive the JB2 stack.
```
footnote: this has been defined already, See fn X at beginning of document.  
Changed to JB2 and mystmd specification, using previously defined terms.

Author: @KirstieJane went through and made a lot of "Jupyter Book 2"s into JB2s but I didn't do that for all of them - it just became too much of a cognitive load to remember all the acronyms for some sections. We have tried to use JB2 when it made sense to have the abbreviation but then spell out Jupyter Book 2 when i felt the sentence was more accessible when we weren't asking the reader to remember the acronym (even though it is available on hover..!).

### A Foundational Structured Document Specification

At the heart of Jupyter Book 2 is the **MyST Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)**, a machine-readable representation of each document’s content and structure. When a user builds a Jupyter Book, the system parses all inputs—including markdown files, MyST directives, Jupyter notebooks, LaTeX documents, and frontmatter—into this unified AST. This process preserves not only the narrative content, but also computational blocks, Jupyter Outputs, citations, cross-references, headings, figures, and semantic metadata such as author affiliations.

### Content First, Format Second

> The architecture emphasizes a **“content-first” model**, where authoring is separated from output format. The AST serves as the single source of truth for rendering content into multiple target formats: web-native HTML, JATS XML, PDF via Typst or LaTeX, Microsoft Word, and more. Each of these renderers consumes the AST and applies format-specific styling, layout, and transformations—without requiring changes to the source content. Our investment is currently focused on the React-renderers, Typst PDF templates (a new PDF renderer that is significantly faster than LaTeX), and JATS XML used in scholarly publishing. For example, the SciPy Proceedings for 2024 and 2025 use both the React renderers, the typst renderer for PDF creation, and JATS XML for all articles.

Reviewer 2: I found the final sentence of this slightly confusing.

> "both the React renderers"

Are there 2 different React renderers? Or was "both"  supposed to refer to the React renderer + the `typst` renderer, and not updated after JATS XML was added to this sentence?

This should be clarified.

> _the React renderers, the typst renderer for PDF creation, and JATS XML for all articles._

The other 2 items in this list are of the form "the `{thing}` renderer for `{purpose}`". I think it'd help readers' understanding if you add a "for `{purpose}`" after "the React renderers" as well.

Author: We have fully rewritten this section (See `Many renderers operate on the same AST`).

This AST is the “source of truth” for rendering content to different formats—HTML, PDF (via LaTeX or Typst), DOCX, JATS XML, or custom layouts. The goal of an intermediate representation means that authors can write once and publish anywhere without manually adapting content for each target format.

### API-Accessible and Federated by Design

> One of the most transformative aspects of the JB2 architecture is that every page has an associated .json API endpoint that exposes its AST and metadata. This means content can be programmatically indexed, referenced, embedded, transcluded, or transformed without needing to scrape or recompile the site. Readers and developers can query structure, citations, and content across books, enabling new tools like federated search, content previews, and live citation graphs.

Reviewer 2: > _.json API endpoint_

Seeing this spelling (`.json`, not code markup), I found myself wondering:

* are they just saying an API endpoint that accepts / returns JSON?
* or do you literally hit a URl like `{host}/{page}.json`?
* or something else?

Could you clarify that? If you just mean to say "an API endpoint that accepts / returns JSON", I'd re-write this as "JSON API".

And if you literally mean the `JSON:API` spec (https://jsonapi.org/), I'd write it as "`JSON:API` endpoint".

Author: We have added the inline code to improve this, and also added:

```
via a machine-readable metadata endpoint (`/pagename.json`).
```

i.e. your point `#2`!

This approach lays the groundwork for a **federated publishing network**—where content from different lab groups, institutions, or journals can be referenced, reused, and remixed while maintaining proper attribution and structure.

> Just as the Jupyter Notebook format (.ipynb) has enabled interoperability across dozens of tools by serving as a stable, well-defined format, the MyST AST aims to serve a similar role for scientific communication. The AST specification is versioned and documented, and efforts are underway to standardize it further via the myst-spec initiative. We are also investing in forward-and-backwards interoperability in this spec through the reference implementation of mystmd. This allows developers, publishers, and downstream platforms to build confidently on top of Jupyter Book 2 without fear of breaking changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Just as the Jupyter Notebook format (`.ipynb`) has enabled interoperability across dozens of tools by serving as a stable, well-defined format, the MyST AST aims to serve a similar role for scientific communication. The AST specification is versioned and documented, and efforts are underway to standardize it further via the myst-spec initiative. We are also investing in forward-and-backwards interoperability in this spec through the reference implementation of mystmd. This allows developers, publishers, and downstream platforms to build confidently on top of Jupyter Book 2 without fear of breaking changes.
```

I would format this as code, to clarify that it's referring to a file extension and isn't (for example) naming a library or other software probject.

Author: We have updated these everywhere.

### A Unified Toolchain

Jupyter Book 2 is built around a cohesive, modular toolchain that enables fast builds, partial updates, and web-optimized outputs. This toolchain includes:

- **jupyter book build** — the core CLI that parses source files into the AST and compiles them into static assets or structured outputs. Built on and mirroring the myst CLI.
- **\@myst-theme** — a modern frontend theme and rendering engine for web output, based on React and optimized for interactivity and performance.
- **jupyterlab-myst** — a JupyterLab extension that renders MyST documents natively inside the notebook interface, creating a tight feedback loop between authoring and final presentation.

> - **Plugin system** — supporting directives, roles, and custom transforms of the AST.

Reviewer 2: I think these all would benefit from links to places where interested reads could learn more.

Especially "plugin system"... that's not as easily searchable as the other things that are software project names.

Author: We have updated this section considerable, added an appendix and provided links to the existing documentation.

> The system also supports per-page and per-project metadata configuration using frontmatter.yml, enabling authors to define publishing metadata, contributor lists, keywords, license info, and custom identifiers in a structured, version-controlled format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The system also supports per-page and per-project metadata configuration using `frontmatter.yml`, enabling authors to define publishing metadata, contributor lists, keywords, license info, and custom identifiers in a structured, version-controlled format.
```

Author: This specific instance was removed, we did a full pass on improving formatting.

### The Relationship Between Jupyter Book and the MyST Engine

> Jupyter Book is a distribution of the mystmd engine. Every Jupyter Book is also a MyST project, and building a Jupyter Book means building a MyST project. Over time, we expect mystmd to be more geared towards power users and jupyter-book to have more built-in, automatic configuration and opinions for building textbooks, community documentation, and course materials, etc. This is similar to the relationship between jupyter book and Sphinx in JB1, and includes escape-hatches for power users to use the underlying modular ecosystem of MyST tools and extensions directly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Jupyter Book is a distribution of the mystmd engine. Every Jupyter Book is also a MyST project, and building a Jupyter Book means building a MyST project. Over time, we expect mystmd to be more geared towards power users and jupyter-book to have more built-in, automatic configuration and opinions for building textbooks, community documentation, and course materials, etc. This is similar to the relationship between jupyter book and Sphinx in JB1, and includes entrypoints for power users to use the underlying modular ecosystem of MyST tools and extensions directly.
```

Proposing removing another idiom:

* "escape-hatches" --> "entrypoints"

Author: We opted to rework this paragraph:

```
With Jupyter Book 2, the project has undergone a major transformation. Jupyter Book 2 is now a distribution of the MyST Document Engine[^pronunciation]; every book built with Jupyter Book 2 is also a MyST project, and building a book with Jupyter Book 2 means building a MyST project. Jupyter Book 2 heavily utilizes components from the MyST ecosystem - a collection of open source tools and standards for authoring open computational narratives. This is similar to the relationship between Jupyter Book 1 and Sphinx.
```

**QuantEcon** provides open educational resources in economics and quantitative methods, built using Python, Julia, and Jupyter. The transition to JB2 included investment in a custom theme for JupyterBook, which allowed the project to modernize its publishing infrastructure while maintaining interactive notebooks and supporting export to multiple formats including html, pdf, and ipynb. The experience for authors remained mostly constant, however, The upgraded theme allowed for adoption of new features like hover cross-reference between exercises and solutions using the proof and exercise extensions.

These case studies demonstrate the flexibility of JB2 to meet the needs of both education and research, large and small teams, and varied technical audiences. Each project benefits from the same core strengths: modular content, structured metadata, and tight integration with Jupyter.

### A note on migrating from Jupyter Book 1

> A key goal of Jupyter Book 2 was to leverage the design and standards from Jupyter Book 1 and the Sphinx stack in order to facilitate the upgrade process. As a result JB2 leverages the same MyST Markdown syntax as JB1 with minimal disruption. It also aims to expose a key subset of the extension points that were available in JB1 and Sphinx (for example, roles, directives, custom transforms, etc). While there is a subset of functionality that is still unique to Sphinx, the JB2 team is focusing their efforts on developing key missing functionality to narrow this gap. This effort has been driven by upgrade collaborations with heavy community users of JB1, described above as case studies.

Reviewer: The section "A note on migrating from Jupyter Book 1" seems better fit at the end of "Architectures of Jupyter Book 2" section, following "The Relationship Between..."  This sections seems lost at the end of Case Studies section.  

The final sentence, "This effort has been driven by upgrade collaborations with heavy community users of JB1, described **below** as case studies." works with "above" changed to "below".

All other parts of the paragraph seem more related to the Architecture section than the Case Studies section.

Author: Agreed. We opted to move this to the appendix, as it did seem out of place there.

The Jupyter Book project is openly governed under Project Jupyter, actively maintained, and already powering a diverse set of high-impact initiatives across domains. From reproducible data science guides like The Turing Way, to educational curricula like QuantEcon and Project Pythia, to domain-specific platforms like the QIIME 2 Framework, Jupyter Book 2 is helping authors publish richer, more reusable, and more transparent scientific outputs.

As scientific publishing continues to evolve, Jupyter Book offers a model for infrastructure that is interoperable, open by design, and responsive to the needs of its users. It is not just a tool for building books—it is a foundation for the next generation of computational publishing.

## Acknowledgements

> Jupyter Book has been developed over the course of nearly a decade, with contributions from dozens of individuals and organizations. We are grateful to the many collaborators, maintainers, and community members who have helped shape the project’s evolution—from its early days as a Jekyll-based tool for compiling notebooks into a textbook, through the Sphinx-based Jupyter Book 1 release, and now with the MyST Markdown and mystmd-based 2 architecture. This article did not intend to capture those wide-ranging contributions or fully document the history of the project — for those who we didn’t reference specifically, the spirit of the first author of the Jupyter Project is to capture your contributions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jupyter Book has been developed over the course of nearly a decade, with contributions from dozens of individuals and organizations. We are grateful to the many collaborators, maintainers, and community members who have helped shape the project’s evolution—from its early days as a Jekyll-based tool for compiling notebooks into a textbook, through the Sphinx-based Jupyter Book 1 release, and now with the MyST Markdown and mystmd-based 2 architecture. This article did not intend to capture those wide-ranging contributions or fully document the history of the project. While we cannot list every individual, we wish to acknowledge the spirit of collaborative contribution that defines the Jupyter Project and extend our gratitude to all who have participated.
```
Correct tone.

Author: We have removed this sentence and cleaned it up!

```
Jupyter Book has been developed over the course of nearly a decade, with contributions from dozens of individuals and organizations. We are grateful to the many collaborators, maintainers, and community members who have helped shape the project’s evolution—from its early days as a Jekyll-based tool for compiling notebooks into a textbook, through the Sphinx-based Jupyter Book 1 release, and now with the MyST Markdown and `mystmd`-based Jupyter Book 2 architecture. This article did not intend to capture those wide-ranging contributions and ideas or fully document the [history of the project](#appendix-history), but instead focused on the unique contributions of the Jupyter Book 2 stack.
```

---
title: Jupyter Book 2 and the MyST Document Stack
subtitle: A modular, extensible, web-native stack for authoring and publishing computational narratives
abstract: |

>   Jupyter Book allows researchers and educators to create books, articles, and collections of connected documents that are reusable, reproducible, and interactive. Over the past three years, Jupyter Book has been entirely rebuilt atop the MyST Document Engine (`mystmd`) and its ecosystem of tools and standards. This new foundation introduces a scalable way to publish modern scientific content that enables interactive code and computation, structured metadata, and content reuse across contexts. It allows for a more fluid workflow between computational discovery and communication, treating computation as a first-class citizen in authoring and reading. Jupyter Book 2 (JB2) is now a Jupyter subproject, and already powers several open scientific resources including [The Turing Way](https://book.the-turing-way.org/), [QuantEcon](https://quantecon.org/), [Project Pythia](https://projectpythia.org/), and the [QIIME 2](https://qiime2.org/) Framework (Q2F) documentation ecosystem. This paper introduces the principles, architecture, and capabilities of JB2, shares real-world adoption stories, and explores how these tools are shaping the future of open computational publishing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Jupyter Book allows researchers and educators to create books, articles, and collections of connected documents that are reusable, reproducible, and interactive. Over the past three years, Jupyter Book has been entirely rebuilt on top of the MyST Document Engine (`mystmd`) and its ecosystem of tools and standards. This new foundation introduces a scalable way to publish modern scientific content that enables interactive code and computation, structured metadata, and content reuse across contexts. It allows for a more fluid workflow between computational discovery and communication, treating computation as a first-class citizen in authoring and reading. Jupyter Book 2 (JB2) is now a Jupyter subproject, and already powers several open scientific resources including [The Turing Way](https://book.the-turing-way.org/), [QuantEcon](https://quantecon.org/), [Project Pythia](https://projectpythia.org/), and the [QIIME 2](https://qiime2.org/) Framework (Q2F) documentation ecosystem. This paper introduces the principles, architecture, and capabilities of JB2, shares real-world adoption stories, and explores how these tools are shaping the future of open computational publishing.
```

"atop" is valid English, but a bit quirky. Replace with "on top of".

---

# Jupyter Book 2 and the MyST Document Stack

## Introduction

> Jupyter Book (@10.5281/zenodo.2561065) has become a widely used tool in computational science and open publishing, powering over 18,000 publicly available books[^deps], lectures, tutorials, and knowledge repositories. It enables clear communication of both exploratory computation and narrative text, making it possible to document, share, and publish computational workflows in accessible formats.

Reviewer 3: I'm only focusing on this because it is the first sentence, so I think important to get clear and right.

- "communication of exploratory computation and narrative text" — does not feel like the primary goal of the tool. "communication of computational narratives" — yes.
- "Make it possible to ... share ... computational workflows" — this, also, does not feel like the primary aim of JB. In my mind, it's not so much about sharing workflows, but about being able to weave computation into narratives easily.

> With Jupyter Book 2, the project has undergone a major transformation. Jupyter Book 2 is now a distribution of the MyST Document Engine[^pronunciation]; every book built with Jupyter Book 2 is also a MyST project, and building a book with Jupyter Book 2 means building a MyST project. Jupyter Book 2 heavily utilizes components from the MyST ecosystem - a collection of open source tools and standards for authoring open computational narratives. This is similar to the relationship between Jupyter Book 1 and Sphinx.

Reviewer 4: Did the definition of MyST as Markedly Structured Text get dropped in the word count edits? I think it does need to be here 😕 

```suggestion
With Jupyter Book 2, the project has undergone a major transformation. Jupyter Book 2 is now a distribution of the MyST (Markedly Structured Text) Document Engine[^pronunciation]; every book built with Jupyter Book 2 is also a MyST project, and building a book with Jupyter Book 2 means building a MyST project. Jupyter Book 2 heavily utilizes components from the MyST ecosystem—a collection of open source tools and standards for authoring open computational narratives. This is similar to the relationship between Jupyter Book 1 and Sphinx.
```

> With Jupyter Book 2, the project has undergone a major transformation. Jupyter Book 2 is now a distribution of the MyST Document Engine[^pronunciation]; every book built with Jupyter Book 2 is also a MyST project, and building a book with Jupyter Book 2 means building a MyST project. Jupyter Book 2 heavily utilizes components from the MyST ecosystem - a collection of open source tools and standards for authoring open computational narratives. This is similar to the relationship between Jupyter Book 1 and Sphinx.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With Jupyter Book 2, the project has undergone a major transformation. Jupyter Book 2 is now a distribution of the MyST Document Engine[^pronunciation]; every book built with Jupyter Book 2 is also a MyST project, and building a book with Jupyter Book 2 means building a MyST project. Jupyter Book 2 heavily utilizes components from the MyST ecosystem — a collection of open source tools and standards for authoring open computational narratives. This is similar to the relationship between Jupyter Book 1 and Sphinx.
```

Replace dash with em-dash.

Author: applied with above change.

> The goal of this overhaul is to make structured scientific content more interoperable, composable, extensible, and machine-readable. This enables researchers to publish high-quality, interactive content with support for standards-based reuse, full-text APIs, executable notebooks, and output formats like Websites, Typst, PDF, LaTeX, Microsoft Word, JATS XML, and more. It is a major step forward towards Jupyter’s vision of thinking and storytelling with code and data [@10.1109/MCSE.2021.3059263; @10.3233/978-1-61499-649-1-87].

Reviewer 3: Wasn't part of the reason for the overhaul to modernize the underlying machinery and the libraries we depend on, and increase extensibility of the platform itself?

Author: Yes, I tried for a few minutes to work this in. I think it dilutes the focus of the introduction though? We could work this in somewhere else if you feel it is important?

The mission of Jupyter Book and MyST is to build composable tools and standards for communicating technical and computational narratives. This must encompass the _full lifecycle of discovery and communication_—from informal lab notes and collaborative tutorials to formal research articles and textbooks. Our goal is to support authors, educators, and researchers as they share work within local communities and publish across the global scientific commons.

We are focused on two overlapping but distinct communities:

Data-driven communicators
: Researchers, analysts, and educators who need to share working, reproducible content with collaborators, students, or the public. These users rely on Jupyter, Python, and other computational tools in their daily workflows, but often lack well-integrated systems to communicate what they’ve done or how to reproduce it.

Scholarly Authors and Publishers
: Scientists and academics preparing content for peer review, journals, repositories, or formal documentation, and organizations that serve these users. They need structured metadata, citation systems, and outputs compatible with academic and institutional publishing pipelines.

> Both of these groups are underserved by the current ecosystem of open source technology. Today’s scientific workflows rely on computational tools like Jupyter Notebooks, yet the systems used to communicate and publish these workflows are fragmented and poorly integrated. For example, researchers often do their work in an interactive computing environment designed for exploration, and must then adopt an entirely new toolchain for publishing their work. As a result, researchers must spend time adapting to new workflows, duplicating and reformatting their content just for the sake of publishing. Published work is often stripped of its computational context and an easy ability to access environments to reproduce a result because of the constraints of output-specific pipelines, such as PDF generation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Both of these groups are underserved by the current ecosystem of open source technology. Today’s scientific workflows rely on computational tools like Jupyter Notebooks, yet the systems used to communicate and publish these workflows are fragmented and poorly integrated. For example, researchers often do their work in an interactive computing environment designed for exploration, and must then adopt an entirely new toolchain for publishing their work. As a result, researchers must spend time adapting to new workflows, duplicating and reformatting their content just for the sake of publishing. Because output-specific pipelines, such as PDF generation, are fairly constrained, published work is often stripped of its computational context, leaving no mechanism to access software environments and reproduce results. 
```

Still not 100% happy with the rephrasing, but the original sentence is hard to parse.

> Over the years, there have been many attempts at improving this workflow with new technologies and standards (several are discussed below), but none have provided the combination of flexibility, standards-based implementation, and community governance needed to cover the entire lifecycle from idea to communication described above. Jupyter Book 2 and the MyST Ecosystem is an attempt to cover this gap.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Over the years, there have been many attempts at improving this workflow with new technologies and standards (several are discussed below), but none have provided the combination of flexibility, standards-based implementation, and community governance needed to cover the entire lifecycle from idea to communication described above. Jupyter Book 2 and the MyST Ecosystem is an attempt to bridge this gap.
```

Jupyter Book 2 combines these and other MyST components into an end-user application meant for community knowledge bases and books. This new architecture is designed to enable dynamic rendering, multi-format output, and composable content workflows—backed by a structured document model that makes metadata, structure, and computation portable and machine-readable.

:::{figure} overview.png
:label: fig:overview

**High-level overview of Jupyter Book 2 components.** Jupyter Book 2 combines several components in the MyST Ecosystem, configured for multi-document workflows such as community knowledge bases, websites, and books. The MyST Document Engine parses MyST Markdown (and other flavors of text-based content) into an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) that follows the MyST Document Specification. It resolves and transforms this AST to enrich it with extra document metadata (such as resolving DOIs). It then renders this AST to React components that are bundled with the Book Theme, which makes up the end-user application most-often used with Jupyter Book 2.
:::

### The MyST Engine: A simple, powerful, and extensible document engine

> The MyST Document Engine (`mystmd`) allows users to **parse** documents into a structured format, **execute** computational content, **transform** them to include metadata and resolve references, and **output** a resolved MyST Abstract Syntax Tree (AST, described in more detail below). It is run via the command-line and is written in TypeScript. It parses many types of inputs—markdown files, Jupyter Notebooks, LaTeX documents, external MyST projects, configuration files, etc—and ensures that all of their content is embedded in this output AST.

Reviewer 4: The "md" part of `mystmd` isn't defined.... is there a way to make that clearer? I don't think there's an explanation of "Markedly Structured Markdown" anywhere so `mystmd` doesn't really mean anything.

Also - why does this abbreviation get formatted as `code` whereas JB2 is just a regular text abbreviation?

Author: I have removed `mystmd` entirely, that is the package/repo, but has a lot in it which we are being more specific in throughout the paper, so that is a bit confusing. One of the reviewers also brought that up!

> ### The MyST Specification: A Foundational Structured Document Specification

Reviewer 3: Wondering if we can avoid some repetition in this heading.

Maybe "The MyST Specification: A Standardized [Computational] Document [Exchange] Format", or similar?

Author: Updated to:

`The MyST Specification: A Structured Computational Document Format`

The **MyST Specification** defines all of the types of content and metadata that make up a computational narrative. It is meant to be a cross-platform standard that can be used by various applications and parsers in order to facilitate sharing and re-use of content.

> The MyST Document Engine outputs a **MyST Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)** that follows the MyST Specification. The AST is a machine-readable representation of each document’s content and structure. It preserves not only the narrative content, but also computational blocks, computational outputs from Jupyter Notebooks, citations, figures, and metadata such as author affiliations and license information. These are all built into a structured, version-controlled AST. It is a **Canonical Document Representation** that can be parsed and rendered into user-facing outputs by renderers and themes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The MyST Document Engine outputs a **MyST Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)** that follows the MyST Specification. The AST is a machine-readable representation of each document’s content and structure. It preserves not only the narrative content, but also computational blocks, computational outputs from Jupyter Notebooks, citations, figures, and metadata such as author affiliations and license information. These are all built into a structured, versioned AST. It is a **Canonical Document Representation** that can be parsed and rendered into user-facing outputs by renderers and themes.
```

Pretty sure that was a muscle-memory slip, but double check :)

> **MyST Markdown** is a flavor of markdown written for the MyST Specification that gives authors quick access to these and other extension points. MyST Markdown supports syntax for all of the content types supported in the MyST Specification. It is used both in Jupyter Book 2 and the MyST Engine, as well as in the Sphinx ecosystem.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**MyST Markdown** is a flavor of markdown written for the MyST Specification that gives authors quick access to these and other extension points. MyST Markdown supports syntax for all of the content types supported in the MyST Specification. It is used both in Jupyter Book 2 and the MyST Engine, as well as in the Sphinx ecosystem via the [myst-parser extension](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
```

Is `myst-parser` the de-facto Sphinx parser?

As an example, see the example **note directive** written in MyST Markdown below (for more information on directives, see the sections below).

```markdown
:::{note} Admonition title
Admonition **body**.
:::
```

> The MyST Document Engine parses this markdown content into an AST that follows the MyST Specification. It looks like the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The MyST Document Engine parses this markdown content into an AST that follows the MyST Specification. It looks like this:
```

```yaml
- type: admonition
  kind: note
  children:
    - type: admonitionTitle
      children:
        - type: text
          value: Admonition title
    - type: paragraph
      children:
        - type: text
          value: 'Admonition '
        - type: strong
          children:
            - type: text
              value: body
        - type: text
          value: ...
```

> This AST is then made available for renderers to export into various output formats.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Renderers then convert this AST into various output formats.
```

### MyST Renderers and Themes: Tools to convert MyST AST into user-facing products

> **MyST Renderers and Themes** are tools for converting documents that follow the MyST Specification into user-facing outputs, such as websites and PDFs. Renderers are essentially a collection of rules for converting each type of content (called a “node” in a MyST AST) into an output. For example, the MyST AST for the Note admonition above would be rendered into a React component, and exported to HTML via the static HTML export (`jupyter book build --html`) like so:

Reviewer 3: If we use the terms "renderer" and "theme", we should probably disambiguate immediately. I'm not sure the example below (which pulls apart rendering and styling), matches what happens in the project. But, also fine to specify what we want these concepts to be in the future.

Author: If you have suggestions on how to improve this section, happy to merge them in..! :)

```html
<-- React component used by the Book or Article theme -->
<Admonition title="Note" kind="{AdmonitionKind.note}" color="blue">
  This is an admonition!
</Admonition>

<-- React component converted to this HTML after static HTML export -->
<aside className="myst-admonition myst-admonition-note">
  <div className="myst-admonition-header">
    <InformationCircleIcon className="myst-admonition-header-icon" />
    <div className="myst-admonition-header-text">Note</div>
  </div>
  <div className="myst-admonition-body">This is an admonition!</div>
</aside>
```

The **Book React Theme** defines the basic structure and styles of a Jupyter Book 2, and is the default result that most users get when they render their books as websites. The React component above is styled by the Book Theme into this final product:

:::{figure} admonition.png
:label: fig:admonition
**Example admonition component.** The final product of a MyST Admonition rendered by the Book Theme. Arguments and keywords in the `{note}` directive influence the look and feel of this final product.
:::

> Importantly, **MyST Renderers can be written for any kind of output**. For example, there is a **Typst** renderer and a **LaTeX** renderer, which can themselves be customized with **themes** to generate different types of outputs. Jupyter Book 2 ships with a default Book Theme for each type of renderer, but we imagine our ecosystem of users extending this to include, for example, LaTeX templates for a variety of Journals. The `myst-templates` github organization ([github.com/myst-templates](http://github.com/myst-templates)) already hosts a collection of community-maintained templates for rendering and theming MyST AST into various kinds of outputs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Importantly, **MyST Renderers can be written for any kind of output**. For example, there is a **Typst** renderer and a **LaTeX** renderer, which can themselves be customized with **themes** to generate different types of outputs. Jupyter Book 2 ships with a default Book Theme for each type of renderer, but we imagine our ecosystem of users extending this to include, for example, LaTeX templates for a variety of Journals. The `myst-templates` GitHub organization ([github.com/myst-templates](http://github.com/myst-templates)) already hosts a collection of community-maintained templates for rendering and theming MyST AST into various kinds of outputs.
```

### Jupyter Book 2: A distribution of MyST components

> Finally, Jupyter Book 2 is a lightweight distribution and configuration layer on top of these and other components of the MyST ecosystem. It is meant to provide an opinionated experience of MyST–for example, by turning on certain features by default, providing an out-of-the-box theme meant for multi-document websites. At its core, Jupyter Book 2 functionality is leveraging components in the MyST ecosystem.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, Jupyter Book 2 is a lightweight distribution and configuration layer on top of these and other components of the MyST ecosystem. It is meant to provide an opinionated experience of MyST–for example, by turning on certain features by default, and by providing an out-of-the-box theme meant for multi-document websites. At its core, Jupyter Book 2 functionality is leveraging components in the MyST ecosystem.
```

> This is a pattern that we wish to encourage and grow in the MyST ecosystem. Tools like the MyST Document Engine aim to be unopinionated, modular, configurable, and extendable. They’re primarily meant for use by **power users and developers** who are interested in configuring MyST tools for their own needs/community, or building MyST tools into separate applications. Jupyter Book 2 is meant for **end-users like researchers and educators** who want an opinionated system for communicating with computational narratives that “just works”.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is a pattern that we wish to encourage and grow in the MyST ecosystem. Tools like the MyST Document Engine aim to be unopinionated, modular, configurable, and extendable. They’re primarily meant for use by **power users and developers** who are interested in configuring MyST tools for their own needs/community, or building MyST tools into separate applications. Jupyter Book 2 is meant for **end-users like researchers and educators** who want an opinionated system for communicating computational narratives that “just works”.
```

Reviewer 3: That last sentence still reads a bit awkwardly. Here is a potential alternative phrasing.

> Jupyter Book 2 is meant for **end-users like researchers and educators** who want to communicate computational narratives. They need an opinionated system that “just works”.

> In this way, we imagine that an ecosystem of tools and services _similar to Jupyter Book 2_ may be built on top of the MyST Document Engine, Specification, Renderers, and other components. With that in mind, we now turn to the design principles that drove the architecture of the MyST ecosystem, and the value that they bring to the open science community.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We envision that a broader _ecosystem_ of high-level tools and services—_similar to Jupyter Book 2_ itself—may be built on top of the MyST Document Engine, Specification, Renderers, and other components. With that in mind, we now turn to the design principles that drove the architecture of the MyST ecosystem, and the value that they bring to the open science community.
```

## Design Principles

> The design of Jupyter Book 2 is grounded in practical responses to the needs of researchers, educators, and publishers who must communicate with and about data, as well as software developers in the open science ecosystem who wish to build new applications on community standards and tools. We’ve grounded the design and development of the Jupyter Book 2 stack with the following principles.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Jupyter Book 2 is designed to meet the practical needs of researchers, educators, and publishers who communicate with—and about—data. It also supports developers in the open science ecosystem who build applications on shared standards and tools. Its design and development are guided by the following principles.
```

Simplify reading by breaking long sentences apart, and using more common wording.

> Simple and quick to use, easy to extend

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Simple to use, easy to extend
```

Not sure "quick" adds much here, and probably can't be a design principle unless you mean execution speed.

: Users should be able to run common workflows with minimal complexity, dependencies, setup, and configuration. Power-users should be able to extend this functionality with minimal effort.

> Content Should be Canonical and Machine Readable

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use Standardized, Machine Readable Formats
```

Not sure if this is the best phrasing, but content itself can't really be canonical, so trying to frame this as "use standard interchange mechanisms".

: There should be a canonical, machine-readable representation of all content, allowing it to be re-used and rendered into multiple outputs without losing structure, metadata, or intent.

Content Should be Modular and Composable
: Canonical content should be made up of small, reusable components to enable reuse, cross-referencing, and re-mixing into diverse outputs.

> Computation should be a First Class Citizen

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Computation Should be a First Class Citizen
```
Gets this line formatted with the same capitalization as the other principles ❤️

> : Code, data, and outputs are treated as integral to the narrative—not hidden, summarized, or stripped away.

Reviewer 3: Sometimes you do want to strip it away, I suppose, so this feels too opinionated. Computation *should* be a first-class citizen, in the sense that it is an integral part of composing a document—you can calculate figures, inline values, etc. And you get caching etc. out of the box.

Author: Changed to:

```
: Code, data, and outputs are treated as integral components of the research narrative, for example, integrated and reproducible ways to calculate figures, show inline values, and cache computations.
```

By treating that document AST as a first-class build output, authors can write their content once, and publish in multiple places without manually adapting their content for each target format. For example, a MyST Document can be built once, and then the resulting `.json` AST can be rendered into an HTML website for reading and multiple LaTeX documents meant for submission to a variety of journals. Paired with the machine readability of the AST (the `.json` file served with websites), it is possible to render multiple “views” of the same underlying content without creating confusion for where the source of truth lies.

> Additionally, having a standard and metadata-rich AST structure allows many different workflows to be served from the same document engine. For example, while this article focuses on the multi-document workflow of Jupyter Book 2, the MyST Document Engine has also been used as part of _scholarly article publishing pipelines_, which are composed of independent articles that benefit from the same ability to cross-reference one another. For example the [Proceedings of SciPy](https://proceedings.scipy.org/) have been published with the MyST Document Engine for the last two years, the Notebooks Now project [@10.5281/zenodo.15061830] incorporated MyST-based publishing into the American Geophysical Union proceedings for the last several years, the [NeuroLibre](https://neurolibre.org/) project has built a pre-print server using the MyST engine, and [Curvenote](https://curvenote.com) builds a publishing platform using MyST components [@doi:10.25080/NKVC9349]. By enabling a variety of publication output types with the same underlying document engine, the MyST Ecosystem can reduce duplicated technology and streamline the workflow from data science and documentation to publishing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Additionally, having a standard and metadata-rich AST structure allows many different workflows to be served from the same document engine. For example, while this article focuses on the multi-document workflow of Jupyter Book 2, the MyST Document Engine has also been used as part of _scholarly article publishing pipelines_, which are composed of independent articles that benefit from the same ability to cross-reference one another. For example the [Proceedings of SciPy](https://proceedings.scipy.org/) have been published with the MyST Document Engine for the last two years, the [Notebooks Now project](https://data.agu.org/notebooks-now/about.html) [@10.5281/zenodo.15061830] incorporated MyST-based publishing into the American Geophysical Union proceedings for the last several years, the [NeuroLibre](https://neurolibre.org/) project has built a pre-print server using the MyST engine, and [Curvenote](https://curvenote.com) builds a publishing platform using MyST components [@doi:10.25080/NKVC9349]. By enabling a variety of publication output types with the same underlying document engine, the MyST Ecosystem can reduce duplicated technology and streamline the workflow from data science and documentation to publishing.
```

Feel free to disregard this suggestion if you don't think the hyperlink makes sense next to the citation. The citation is definitely the correct one, I just felt the paragraph looked a little odd having links to the other examples but not this one!

Author: Added the link!

:::

### Content Should be Modular and Composable

The MyST ecosystem is designed for composition. Documents are structured into small, addressable components—sections, figures, equations, terms, figures, outputs—that can be reused across books, projects, and publications. This modularity supports new patterns of collaboration and publication: a figure generated in a course textbook can be cited and embedded in a tutorial or a journal article without duplication or loss of provenance. A community policy or database can be re-used throughout many pages in its documentation without duplicating information and creating multiple sources of truth. Additionally, configuration for a collection of projects can be [shared and reused](#appendix-composable).

#### The MyST AST modularizes content for easy parsing and re-mixing

> Each page or resource in a Jupyter Book project is assigned a unique slug and corresponding AST. These can be referenced across projects, embedded in-line with other page content, or previewed when users hover over links. This is based on both the [MyST Specification](http://mystmd.org/spec) and a machine-readable cross-reference manifest `myst.xref.json`[^myst-xref]. Similar to intersphinx references, a feature for cross-project linking in the Sphinx documentation generator, the `myst.xref.json` gives stable links to any aspect of the content. This makes it easy to programmatically learn the structure of a Jupyter Book, referenceable labels, and the location of the canonical content for each document.

Reviewer 4: I don't know what slug means in this context 🐛

Author: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clean_URL#Slug

Apparently it is from news-media! Added a link and parenthetical.

````{code filename="computational-page.md"}
(full-plot-context)=
This code generates an image:

```{code-cell}
:label: my-plot
plt.scatter([1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6])
```
````

In `another-page.md`, the author is able to insert this output into a figure with a caption like so:

```{code filename="another-page.md"}
Below you see the results of my computation:

:::{figure} #my-plot
Here's a caption for the image referenced by `my-plot`, see [the full plot context](#full-plot-context) for details.
:::
```

Our goal with Jupyter Book 2 is to integrate computational content at every level. Code, figures, outputs, and interactive elements are embedded directly in the narrative and treated as primary content—not sidebars or supplemental material. This increases the likelihood that authors will interweave computational content into the reading experience, increases the reproducibility and re-usability of computational ideas, and allows for more powerful storytelling through computation, data, and software (@10.1109/MCSE.2021.3059263).

#### In-page computation brings computational interactivity to the reading experience

> Beyond static computational outputs, Jupyter Book 2 embraces the web-native workflows of modern data science by allowing computation to power interactive experiences with a live kernel. Executable content can be powered by any Jupyter Kernel by leveraging MyST’s native integration with [Thebe](https://thebe.readthedocs.io/en/stable/), which enables static documents to become interactive by linking code cells with a computational kernel. Thebe can leverage kernel providers from sources like Binder [@10.25080/Majora-4af1f417-011], JupyterHub, or a local Jupyter Server, allowing readers to rerun computations on demand, right from the page without leaving the context of the narrative.

Reviewer 4: Jupyter Kernel or kernel?

Author: This is `any Juptyer Kernel` at the moment, which is how it reads (I think).

> **The QIIME 2 Framework (Q2F)** is a platform for biological data science tools, originally developed for the QIIME 2 microbiome bioinformatics toolkit, but now supporting tools across diverse subdomains of biology including multiplexed serology and pathogen genomics. Q2F has adopted JB2 to support its documentation ecosystem which includes documentation that is general to users of all Q2F-based tools (e.g., creating and using a Q2F data artifact cache) and documentation that is specific to subdomains (e.g., an end-to-end tutorial for microbiome data analysis). JB2 enables embedding of content across documentation projects, such that general content can be embedded in domain-specific content where relevant, making it easier to hide the software stack complexity from end users while avoiding duplication of source content.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
**The QIIME 2 Framework (Q2F)** is a platform for biological data science tools, originally developed for the QIIME 2 microbiome bioinformatics toolkit, but now supporting tools across diverse subdomains of biology including multiplexed serology and pathogen genomics. Q2F has adopted JB2 to support its documentation ecosystem which includes documentation that is [general to users of all Q2F-based tools](https://use.qiime2.org) (e.g., creating and using a Q2F data artifact cache) and documentation that is specific to subdomains (e.g., [an end-to-end tutorial for microbiome data analysis](https://amplicon-docs.qiime2.org/en/latest/tutorials/gut-to-soil.html)). JB2 enables embedding of content across documentation projects, such that general content can be embedded in domain-specific content where relevant, making it easier to hide the software stack complexity from end users while avoiding duplication of source content.
```

This suggestion integrates a couple of specific examples of JB2 content. Feel free to include or not based on whether this aligns with what you're going for.

As scientific publishing continues to evolve, Jupyter Book offers a model for infrastructure that is interoperable, open by design, and responsive to the needs of its users. It is not just a tool for building books—it is a foundation for the next generation of computational publishing.

## Acknowledgements

Jupyter Book has been developed over the course of nearly a decade, with contributions from dozens of individuals and organizations. We are grateful to the many collaborators, maintainers, and community members who have helped shape the project’s evolution—from its early days as a Jekyll-based tool for compiling notebooks into a textbook, through the Sphinx-based Jupyter Book 1 release, and now with the MyST Markdown and `mystmd`-based Jupyter Book 2 architecture. This article did not intend to capture those wide-ranging contributions and ideas or fully document the [history of the project](#appendix-history), but instead focused on the unique contributions of the Jupyter Book 2 stack.

> This project has benefited from key financial support from multiple organizations. The development of MyST Markdown, the Executable Books ecosystem, and Jupyter Book 1 was supported by a grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (Grant #9231). The development of `mystmd` and the rearchitecture of Jupyter Book 2 were made possible in-part by funding from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (Grant #9231), Alberta Innovates, The Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability, the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (2i2c, [link](https://chanzuckerberg.com/science/programs-resources/open-science/grants/2i2c/)), and The Navigation Fund (2i2c, [link] (`https://doi.org/10.71707/r3sy-7371`)). It also included in-kind support from Curvenote, 2i2c, and the broader open-source community. The refactoring of the QIIME 2 Framework documentation ecosystem was supported in part by the NIH National Cancer Institute (Grant 1U24CA248454-01). Project Pythia’s transition to Jupyter Book 2 was supported by the National Science Foundation (awards 2324302, 2324303 and 2324304). Notebooks Now was supported by a grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation ([#19361](https://sloan.org/grant-detail/g-2022-19361)).

Reviewer 4: @stefanv - do you want to acknowledge Scientific Python's funding from CZI here too?

> We especially acknowledge Chris Sewell, whose foundational work on the MyST Markdown specification, the Sphinx parser (`myst-parser`), and the wider Jupyter Book 1 ecosystem in Sphinx. Chris’s attention to these technical underpinnings laid the groundwork for many of the capabilities now realized in Jupyter Book 2. In addition, we acknowledge John Stachurksi for providing key leadership and securing the original funding that created the Jupyter Book 1 ecosystem built on Sphinx.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We especially acknowledge Chris Sewell, whose foundational work on the MyST Markdown specification, the Sphinx parser (`myst-parser`), and the wider Jupyter Book 1 ecosystem in Sphinx. Chris’s attention to these technical underpinnings laid the groundwork for many of the capabilities now realized in Jupyter Book 2. In addition, we acknowledge John Stachurski for providing key leadership and securing the original funding that created the Jupyter Book 1 ecosystem built on Sphinx.
```

We also acknowledge the work of the Executable Books team, the contributors to Jupyter Frontends sub-project, Thebe, and the maintainers of MyST-related tooling and plugins. The ongoing development of Jupyter Book 2 is supported and stewarded by the Jupyter Book Community, and is now a subproject of Project Jupyter.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

Authors are in alphabetical order after "Project Jupyter" following Project Jupyter's approved [process for authoring Jupyter related academic papers](https://jupyter.org/governance/papers.html) and aligned with our shared values of inclusivity and generosity in authorship, following clear, explicit criteria for authorship, openness, and personal accountability.
```

Is there a way to make this a little footnote maybe from the author list? Just to make it mega explicit that its alphabetical?

[^deps]: There are 18.152 dependencies of JupyterBook (v1 and v2, combined) based on GitHub dependency graph: https://github.com/jupyter-book/jupyter-book/network/dependents.

> [^pronunciation]: MyST is pronounced like “missed”.

Reviewer 4: I can see that @choldgraf's PR to include the pronunciation of MyST is merged to the docs (https://github.com/jupyter-book/mystmd/pull/2238) but I think maybe there needs to be a release to be able to actually see that new section live? 

I really like it, and I was going to suggest turning this into a link to that section in the docs.... feel free to disregard if its too much work at short notice! Not necessary - I just like it!

Author: Live, will link it in.

https://mystmd.org/guide/guiding-principles#how-do-i-pronounce-myst

As scientific publishing continues to evolve, Jupyter Book offers a model for infrastructure that is interoperable, open by design, and responsive to the needs of its users. It is not just a tool for building books—it is a foundation for the next generation of computational publishing.

## Acknowledgements

Jupyter Book has been developed over the course of nearly a decade, with contributions from dozens of individuals and organizations. We are grateful to the many collaborators, maintainers, and community members who have helped shape the project’s evolution—from its early days as a Jekyll-based tool for compiling notebooks into a textbook, through the Sphinx-based Jupyter Book 1 release, and now with the MyST Markdown and `mystmd`-based Jupyter Book 2 architecture. This article did not intend to capture those wide-ranging contributions and ideas or fully document the [history of the project](#appendix-history), but instead focused on the unique contributions of the Jupyter Book 2 stack.

> This project has benefited from key financial support from multiple organizations. The development of MyST Markdown, the Executable Books ecosystem, and Jupyter Book 1 was supported by a grant from the **Alfred P. Sloan Foundation** (Grant #9231). The development of `mystmd` and the rearchitecture of Jupyter Book 2 were made possible in-part by funding from the **Alfred P. Sloan Foundation** (Grant #9231), **Alberta Innovates, The Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability**, the **Chan Zuckerberg Initiative** (2i2c, [link](https://chanzuckerberg.com/science/programs-resources/open-science/grants/2i2c/)), and **The Navigation Fund** (2i2c, [link] (`https://doi.org/10.71707/r3sy-7371`)). It also included in-kind support from **Curvenote**, **2i2c**, and the broader open-source community. The refactoring of the QIIME 2 Framework documentation ecosystem was supported in part by the **NIH National Cancer Institute** (Grant 1U24CA248454-01). Project Pythia’s transition to Jupyter Book 2 was supported by the **National Science Foundation** (awards 2324302, 2324303 and 2324304).  **Notebooks Now** was supported by a grant from the **Alfred P. Sloan Foundation** ([link](https://sloan.org/grant-detail/g-2022-19361)).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
This project has benefited from key financial support from multiple organizations. The development of MyST Markdown, the Executable Books ecosystem, and Jupyter Book 1 was supported by a grant from the **Alfred P. Sloan Foundation** (Grant #9231). The development of `mystmd` and the rearchitecture of Jupyter Book 2 were made possible in-part by funding from the **Alfred P. Sloan Foundation** (Grant #9231), **Alberta Innovates, The Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability**, the **Chan Zuckerberg Initiative** (2i2c, [link](https://chanzuckerberg.com/science/programs-resources/open-science/grants/2i2c/)), and **The Navigation Fund** (2i2c, [link](https://doi.org/10.71707/r3sy-7371)). It also included in-kind support from **Curvenote**, **2i2c**, and the broader open-source community. The refactoring of the QIIME 2 Framework documentation ecosystem was supported in part by the **NIH National Cancer Institute** (Grant 1U24CA248454-01). Project Pythia’s transition to Jupyter Book 2 was supported by the **National Science Foundation** (awards 2324302, 2324303 and 2324304).  **Notebooks Now** was supported by a grant from the **Alfred P. Sloan Foundation** ([link](https://sloan.org/grant-detail/g-2022-19361)).
```

Author: This DOI is currently causing a hard failure at the moment. I think @fwkoch has a fix coming.
